Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're
finishing off this little series called
relativistic velocity Edition core circles and
Paul Miller's protractor we want to go back to the
original topic of relativistic velocity Edition
as introduced by Albert Einstein in the context of
special relativity we want to look at it a little
bit with new eyes in a more GE metrical way with
these insights that we've developed having to
do with core circles and our understanding of
Paul Miller's protractor which we're going to
extend a little bit today as well okay so a key
theme will be the interplay between our familiar
ukian geometry called blue and this relativistic
geometry of Einstein Laurence minkowski which we
call Red and we've seen that if we're interested
in the projective line namely all the projective
one points or lines to the origin then this core
circle with equation x^2 + y^2 = x helps us
because in particular the projective quadrants
between two such projective one points turns out
to be equal to the ukian quadrants between those
two points points where these two lines meet our
core Circle and also poly protractor applied in
this situation okay so it's natural for us to ask
well what happens in this relativistic setting is
there some kind of analogous story and there is
so there's also a core Circle in the red setting
which has equation x^2 - y^2 = x and it looks like
a hyperbola as well like this but it has Center
1 12 Z and we're going to see that we can ask ask
the same kinds of questions we can talk about two
projective one points say A and B and we can try
to relate the projective quadrants between these
two in this red setting and this apine quadrants
between these corresponding points here where the
two lines actually meet our core Circle all
right so this is a very interesting situation
and it's quite interesting for physicists so if
you're a physics student interested in special
relativity for example and of course all physics
students are then you're probably going to learn
something interesting in this lecture I'm
going to uh show you a little bit of a more
geometrical um algebraic way of thinking about
some aspects having to do with velocity addition
and relativistic boosts or rotations in this
red setting so let me Begin by consolidating
some of the things that we've leared in our last
few videos here is the ukian situation again and
we have our two favorite or two of our favorite
projective one points this one here which is 3:
1 call it little a and this one here which is
1:2 call it little B and I remind you that if
we're interested in where these lines meet
the core Circle there's a relatively easy
way of doing that so we take the coordinates
here 3 and 1 and we multiply both of them by
the quantity X over x^2 + y^2 so the X2 +
y^2 is 10 so we're multiplying both these
coordinates by 3/ 10 giving us 9 over 10 and 3
over 10 and that's actually the point a capital
A on the core Circle which lies on this line
similarly here for B we have to multiply by
the x coordinate one over the sum of the squares
which is five so we multiply by 1/5 to get 1/5
2 fths and that's the point capital B right
there where this line meets the core Circle
okay now a crucial fact that we established
was that this picture relates the projective
quadrants between these two projective
one points namely little q and the Aline
quadrants between these points capital A and
capital B and in this case we've seen probably
number of times now that both of those numbers
happen to be 1/2 okay so this is a quadrants
of 1/2 and this is a projective quadrants of
1/2 and I want to remind you of a few other
things uh in this story so um suppose that we're
interested in for example uh this quadrants here
okay so the quadrants between O and B let
me write that here the quadrants between O
and B well that's very easy because it's just
this thing squared plus this thing squared so
1 25th + 4 25ths is 5 25ths which is 1 15 okay
and that 1/5 is the same as the point that you
get here on the x- axis which is the vertical
projection of the point B in other words this
1/5 is the same as the x coordinate of B all
right so there's a 1/5 right there so this is
a very lovely fact about the core Circle that if
we're interested in a quadrants from the origin
to any point on this circle a quadrants then
we can obtain that simply by taking whatever
point we're interested in dropping it down and
reading our off the coordinate on the x-axis very
simple this 1/5 is also by Paul Miller's
protractor idea the same as this spread
that's sitting right there so this thing is also
1/5 and Paul Miller's protractor is really
the point is that uh if we want to measure
the spread between this line and this line
easy way of doing it is to see where it
meets the core Circle and then just drop
down perpendicularly and whatever that x
coordinate is that's the spread 1/5 in this
case so similarly the quadrants between o and
a without any calculation from here to
here will just be the x coordinate 9/10
and that will also be the same as the
quadrants between the x axis and this
line right here so I can actually put
a little bar there and say that this is
910 and uh we might uh remark that
what is this spread over here well
if this spread is 9/10 then one fact
that we know is that this is going to
be always perpendicular because this is
theil's theorem and this is a diameter
so if this is uh 9/10 here then this
is going to end up being 1/10th over
here and so by the same corresponding
fact the quadrants between A and P is
going to be uh 1/10th okay it's the same
as the quadrants between the uh the x-
axis and our line a projective
coordinates between those two
things all right so some pleasant aspects
of the geometry of this core Circle Paul
Miller's protractor the fact that spreads in
this context are very easy to measure all what
we really need is a linear scale from 0 to
one and we can read off spreads as long as
we have this core Circle in place we need
the circle but we don't have to have this
circle measured off particular we don't have
to have a an angular measure on that Circle
just the circle as a geometrical object
together with projection down onto the
x-axis is enough to easily read off Aon
quadrants is and also projective quad qu
or spreads all right so now let's ask another
question suppose that we're interested in the
quadrants between A and B this number that we
called Q here so the question is how to read
off the quadrants Q which is the
quadrants between A and B from the
diagram this is not a quadrants where one of
the points is o or P those kind of quadrant is
we can read off by the game of projecting
down how do we deal with a more General
quadrants between any two points on this
core Circle well it turns out that there's
a nice way of doing that which extends
the idea of Paul Miller's protractor so
let's have a look at how we would actually
read that off relatively painlessly with
just a little bit of geometry okay so we're
going to use a relatively simple theorem from
ukian geometry which we'll call the parallel
corage theorem and I'm just going to give it
to you here in the case of this core Circle
although it easily extends to more General
circles this theorem is almost obvious
geometrically but even obvious things need
proofs and we're going to giving an algebraic
proof of this uh so that's it's independent of
any prior theory of ukan geometry we actually
want our mathematics to be independent of ukian
geometry okay so if O A B and C are four
points on our core Circle C with o being
our usual origin and OB parallel to ca so o
e is parallel to C A all right so these two
lines are parallel then the quadrants between
a and b equals the quadrants between O and
C I hope it's geometrically obvious but here's
a proof so we're going to let a general point a
be 1 over 1+ t^2 T over 1 + t^2 we can assume
that uh the point is not uh the origin it's a
different point and similarly we have B terms of
our parameterization of the core circle with a
parameter s and C same thing with parameter R so
REM you this is sort of the generic point on the
core Circle it's a rational parameterization of
the core Circle which doesn't include the origin
o right then the vector from C to a this Vector c
a which is the difference between this point and
this point turns out if you take these differences
and look at what they are you can write this as a
multiple of this Vector the vector r + T RT minus
1 and the multiple happens to be r - t/ 1 + r^ 2
1 + t^2 so please check that if you just take
the difference between these two points you're
going to get this Vector the vector B is simpler
because the O is the origin B is that point there
so we can write that as 1 1 + s² take that common
factor out times the vector 1 s all right so if
we're assuming that OB and C are parallel well it
means that these two vectors are multiples of each
other and the fact that this is a
multiple of that can be expressed
by saying that this time this minus this *
this equals 0 if you like the ratio of this
to this equals the ratio of this to this
when you cross multiply there's no more
denominators so r + T * s minus RT - 1 * 1 =
0 so parallel lines imply this relation and
then we can solve this relation for R in
terms of T and S and we get TS + 1 / t -
s so if T and S are known then we can determine R
by this formula all right and now we can compute
that the quadrants between O and C is well that's
the kind of quadrants that we've just been talking
about because o is the origin the quadrants from
here to here will just be the x coordinate of C
which is 1 1 + r^ 2 and then when you take this
R and you plug it into here and do a little bit
of simplification pleasantly you get S - t ^ 2/
s^2 + 1 t^2 + 1 and that's the same thing as the
quadrants between A and B the quadrants between
these two points it's another formula that we
established in our last video or the one before
it the quadrants of two points on this core Circle
so we've calculated by computation that yes indeed
if these two lines are parallel then this quadrant
here equals this quadrant there okay so now we
can use this parallel cords theorem to extend
Paul Miller's protractor to allow us to pretty
easily read off the projective quadrants between
any two lines through the origin in other words
between any two projective one points so to find
the spread say Q or projective quadrants made
by the lines little a and little B through the
origin right so we're interested in what is this
projective quadrants want to be able to read it
off well we look at the point capital A and
capital B which are the corresponding points
on the core Circle corresponding to these
lines little a and little B okay we have
these two points now so what now we find the
point C also on here so that o b is parallel
to O C in other words we take the line from o to
B and through a we construct a line parallel to
that that's the red one there and the other
point where it meets the core Circle that's
C and then the quadrants between A and
B is what we're interested in which is
q and that's the x coordinate of the point
C in other words we just drop that point C
down onto the x-axis and read off on our
linear scale from 0 to 1 what the value
is the x coordinate of that point C
is this projective quadrant little
Q okay and why is that well it's just
because in this situation here the
parallel chords theorem tells us that the
quadrants between A and B is the same as
the quadrants between O and C so if we're
interested in this quadrants which is the
same as the projective quadrants between
the two lines here this capital Q is the
same as this quadrants from here to here and
since this quadrants is starting at o it's
evaluated just by dropping this point down
and reading the x coordinate so it's very
simple so this way we can easily read off not
just projective quadrates from the horizontal
to some other point but in fact any two
lines emanating from o and they can be in
any direction whatsoever we just perform
the same trick and and uh and we get our
quadrants now I want to mention just a a
slight variant on this which is amusing
maybe two slight variants so the other one
is that well we didn't have to actually go
from o to B we could also have gone from o to
a okay if we had done that then we would have
had to draw a line through b which is parallel to
this one if we had done that we would have gotten
that would have been the point
C in that case maybe C Prime and
then projecting it onto the x axis we
would still get exactly that same value
there uh there's maybe some something
else to uh point out which is also
amusing so another way of getting this
point C is to reflect one of the these
points say a in the x-axis let's say
a prime and then take the line a prime
b and a line through o in that direction will meet
the core Circle in the point C so you might like
to check that those various statements are also
true so there's actually a number of different
ways of getting at this point C or maybe that
point C Prime in order to find the quadrants
between these two points here or equivalently
the projective quadrants or spread between these
two lines here so PA M's protractor is a very
flexible and a powerful tool and remarkably it
works beautifully for other geometries as well
not just the ukian one in particular it works
for the red relativistic geometry just as well
okay so let's have a look at the basic setup in
the red relativistic geometry here is our usual
XY plane and the unit circle in the red setting
is x^2 - y^2 = 1 and here it is right here it's a
hyperbola with ASM tootes the lines of slope one
and minus one through the origin and uh very nice
object that plays the same role as the X2 + y^2
equal 1 Circle in the ukian geometry but in
addition we have something here now that we don't
have also in the ukian situation which we might
call the negative unit circle x^2 - y^2 = -1 in
the ukian geometry this circle is not so visible
as the regular unit circle it's still important
as it turns out but it's not so visible here it's
very visible and it's this hyperbola it's opening
in these opposite directions just a rotation of
this one by our quarter turn right so what we now
want to do is ask well what about the core circle
is there an analog of that not surprisingly there
is and has equation x^2 - y^2 = x and you can get
at it by taking the unit circle and shrinking it
by a factor of two now it's multiplying it
by a half and then translating it over by a
half just the same way we do in the cing case
to get the core Circle and here it is here it
now has Center the point 1/ 12 Z is before the
asmp tootes now are the lines of slope one and
minus one through 1 12 Z and it has one branch
going through the origin o and another Branch
going through this point P the other thing we
need to know about it is how to find a point on
it that's lying on a given line so if we have
this line or projective one point say a with
coordinates U to T that means that the point u
t is actually somewhere on here but this is only
determined up to a scalar then a corresponding
point on this line which actually passes through
the core circle is this point a which is u^2 over
U ^ 2us t^2 and U over u^ 2us T ^2 you see that
is a multiple of U if we take the U and u^2 -
t^2 out front it's a multiple and it's easy to
check that if you take this thing squared and you
subtract this thing squared then you do get the x
coordinate so this is very similar to the story
in the ukian case we have to take U and T and
multiply both coordinates by the x coordinate U
divided by U ^2 minus t ^2 the quadrants of that
point in this red setting so it's very analogous
to what happens in the ukian situation okay now
I want to show you that the core Circle in this
relativistic red setting really plays the same
role as just as useful uh for physics minded
people as our ukian core Circle was in the ukian
case Okay so let's make a few calculations and
I'm going to use specific points and I'm going
to leave you to generalize these things uh for the
general case so here's our core Circle through the
origin and through this point P interval 01 right
there Center 1 12 zero ASM tootes like this and
we're going to choose two projective one points
little a which is 4 to 3 and little B which is 5:
1 the corresponding points on the core Circle
are capital A which is 16 over 7 12 over 7 how
did we get that we multiplied both of these
coordinates by X over 4^ 2 - 3^ 2 which is
7 and the corresponding point on Little B is
this capital B which is 25 over 24 5 over 24
obtained from this one by multiplying both
coordinates by the x coordinate / 5^2 - 1^
2 or 24 have to multiply by 5 over 24 getting
25 over 24 and 5 24 so let's illustrate a few
things first of all the quadrants between these
two lines projective coordinates between this
line little a and this line little b or the
spread if you like but in this red setting so
it's the projective quadrants between 51 and 43
and that's 1 minus basic formula is to take the
dot product between these two uh things so 5
* 4 - 1 * 3 because it's the Red Dot product
or inner product so all of that squared divided
by 25 -1 * 16 - 9 the difference of the squares
and that simplifies to be - 121 over 168 and
we've seen that before because we've had a look
at these two particular lines um previously what
about the ordinary apine quadrants between these
two points still in the red setting so now it's
just a question of taking these points taking the
difference between the x coordinates squared minus
the difference in the y-coordinate squared and
that turns out to be -11 over 168 which of course
is exactly the same as this projective quadrants
so the story is exactly the same as it was in
the UK setting the projective quadrants between
these two projective one points is the same as
the apine quadrants between the corresponding
points on the core Circle very pleasantly so
we can go from apine Quadrant is to projective
quadrant is very easily by this intermediary of
the core circle now what about this Paul Miller's
protractor Story how do we actually read off what
this quadrants is or maybe what this projective
quadrants Q is well we have to find the point C
there's the line OB we take the line through a
which is parallel to this one something like
that and see where it meets the core Circle
that will be the point C and how do we find that
well we just uh take that Vector there and go a
multiple that Vector in from a see where we
meet this core Circle another way would be
to reflect a in here say a prime take a prime B
that vector and move it to O and see where that
line line meets the core Circle either way you
can calculate that the coordinates of c are -121
over 168 and 187 168 and lo and behold when
we project this thing down the number that we
get there is - 121 over 168 exactly the number
that we're looking for exactly the projective
quadrants between the two original lines or
equivalently the aine quadrants between these
corresponding points on the core Circle so Paul
Miller's protractor is working very well for us
here and not only can we find uh quadran is
between the horizontal and an arbitrary line
that would just be the case when this point B
is actually P just a special case but uh we can
fact find the projective coordinates between
any two lines to the origin so we can easily
find spreads using this basic setup basically just
draw a few parall lines drop down the x-axis and
read off a value and notice that the values that
you're going to read off are necessarily numbers
which are less than or equal to zero or numbers
which are greater than or equal to one because
this hyperbola it's shadow on the x axis is
just these segments here in particular this
segment here doesn't get covered so you're never
going to get a projective quadrants with values
strictly between 0 and one that's the ukian case
the ukan case is giving us values in here this
relativistic case is giving us values outside the
interval they complement each other in a pleasant
way okay you'll like to generalize this
so I've done it with a special case it's
a lovely exercise in algebra basically very
similar to what we did in the ukan case just
to work it out with General points work out the
algebra see that everything works out pleasantly
as it should okay so now I'd like to go full
circle and go back to the original idea that
we started talking about with relativistic
velocity addition of Einstein this formula
that if you have two relativistic velocities say
1/5 and 1/2 then to add them relativistically we
don't just take their sum we take their sum
divided by an appropriate sort of scaling
factor which is 1 plus their product so 1 + 1/5
* 1/2 so this is uh altogether 7 over 11 it's
a number that we've seen before because we've
actually looked at uh these particular examples
before so what I want to show you now is sort
of to illustrate how this relativistic velocity
Edition actually has a very pleasant geometrical
interpretation very much along the same lines of
the kinds of things we've been talking about so
here's our core Circle and these two velocities
are represented in this picture by two lines
there's a line 5: 1 and there's a line 2 to
one now with this picture that we're drawing
here we're thinking of sort of time as being
in this direction a little bit different from
what relativistic physicists usually do but more
in keeping with the usual idea about describing
a particle's trajectory by having time here and
position here okay so this represents a velocity
of basically 1/5 if we renormalize this to be 1 to
1/5 namely that number there be 1/5 then that's
giving us the the velocity and this is a bigger
velocity it would correspond to uh that's 1/2
we divide it by two we get the point one to
1/2 okay so um what's going on here well it
turns out that something's uh interesting
so first of all let's call this uh line B and
this line uh C and the corresponding points on
the core Circle our capital B which is 25
over 24 5 over 24 the corresponding Point
here is capital c which is 4/3 comma 2/3 okay
there's the point B there's the point C now
what I'm going to do is I'm going to uh look
at this corresponding U sum the relativistic
sum of the two velocities 7 11 which correspond
wants to a line like this with name 11 to 7 and
the corresponding point on the core Circle
would be 121 over 72 77 over 72 we get that
by multiplying both coordinates by x / 11^ 2
- 7^ 2 11 2 - 7 s is 72 so we have to multiply
this by 11 over 72 that's how we get this
point right here and there it is right there
so I want to explain that basically the same
picture that we've just been looking at suffices
to show there's a geometrical relationship between
these four points P this point B this point C and
this point D and we can see that by just looking
at the vector the vector from B to C B to C just
taking the difference between this point here and
this point here okay so that minus that gives the
vector 7 over 24 11 over 24 that's the vector
from capital P to Capital C while the vector P
to D it's the difference between this point and
the point P which is of course 1 Z and you can
work that out easily enough that's 49 over 72
77 over 72 and then when we look at these two
vectors we notice that they are parall they're
both multiples of 7A 11 take out common factors
this is 7 to 11 this is 7 to 11 so telling us
that the line BC is parallel to the line PD
this gives us a geometrical construction for
Einstein's relativistic velocity addition if
we started with this line representing a velocity
of 1/5 and and this line representing a velocity
of 1/2 and we were interested in what is the
velocity corresponding to their relativistic
sum we don't in fact have to do any algebra we
don't even need to know any of the coordinates
as long as we have the core Circle in front of
us we just look to see where our two lines meet
the core Circle and draw a line through
P which is parallel to that segment and
where that line meets the core Circle the
second time that is the point that we're
interested in that then is the velocity which
is the relativistic sum of the two original
velocities so this is related to an interesting
uh multiplication or group structure on a general
conic in fact which is described in algebra
topology uh 2 and I give some references there to
other people's work as well so there's a a general
story here this isn't just a sort of special case
of some phenomena that happens quite generally
for a general conic but what we're seeing is that
this perhaps somewhat mysterious relativistic
addition formula of Einstein geometrically is
very very simple thing it's really sort of a
manifestation of the parallel cord theorem for
for our core Circle so let's summarize what
we've been doing and especially noting the
parallel between the ukian situation and the
relativistic one that we basically have a
way of looking at these things where there's a
bit of algebraic difference but the essential
content algebraically is really the same in both
of these different directions so here is our core
Circle again now in the ukian situation so we're
working in blue geometry here and suppose that we
have two points A and B on the core Circle and
they have the same kind of formulas as we were
talking about before so a is 1 1 + t^2 T over 1 +
t^2 that is it's the place where the line through
the1 T meets the core Circle and B is the place
on the core Circle where this line 1 to S meets
the core Circle it's got coordinates 1 1 + S2 and
S over 1 + s s and let's also uh suppose that we
have a third Point D given by 1/ 1 + p^ 2 p over
1 + p^ 2 so that it's the point on the core Circle
such that this line goes through our uh X = one
line at the point 1 P so on this line here these
three lines have very simple intersections one
comma T 1 comma s and 1 comma p and now let's
suppose that in addition we have a similar kind
of parallel situation as we did in the earlier
examples but slightly different that we assume
that a b is parallel to p d where p as before is
our 0. 1 Z so imagine starting with a drawing that
line segment there and then drawing a line through
P which is parallel to that and seeing where the
second point of intersection with the core circle
is and calling that D then the claim is that this
uh number P is obtained from T and S through this
relation that 1 to T * 1 to S = 1 to p and here
I'm using the algebraic structure on the idian
projective line that we talked about a few videos
back I remind you that in general that goes uh we
take this time this minus this time this that's
the first entry and then the second entry is this
time this plus this time this so it's just the
one-dimensional or projective version of complex
number multiplication and that this Arrangement
between t s and p is equivalent to this formula
for p in terms of T and S namely p = t + S over
1 - TS so this is how the multiplication the
one-dimensional multiplication on our projective
line translates when we're looking at things in
terms of the meat on uh on this line here this is
the kind of thing that we've seen before but it
directly connects the multiplication or algebraic
structure on our project of line with rotations in
the plane or on the core Circle C this algebraic
structure where we say this * this equals this
really corresponds to addition of angles in the
transcendental classical setting but there's
no real need for angles here so in a classical
setting you would say that this angle plus this
angle equals this angle but we're able to express
this fundamental relation purely algebraically
without having to need these transcendental
Notions of angles and I'd like to point out also
a secondary kind of activity to to think about
suppose that we look not just at the core Circle
but also at the unit circle centered at 0 0 so the
unit circle that's drawn in red to distinguish it
it's going to be this biger circle something
like this coming out like that right a unit
circle going around like that so you can convince
yourself that in fact the same kinds of relations
uh hold here that if these two lines meet the unit
circle let me put them at those points there and
uh meets also this thing here then you can verify
that in fact the relation here this line segment
here and this line segment here are also parallel
so whether we're measuring the rotations on the
core Circle or rotations on the unit circle
it's really equivalent but with the provisor
that on the core Circle things are actually making
sense at all times because we don't have to worry
about whether a line through the origin meets the
core Circle or not it always does okay it's not
necessarily the case for the unit circle because
sometimes a line through the center will meet it
and sometimes it won't so the core circle is a
much better way of connecting the projective line
with the geometry and the algebraic structure
of the uh the plane all right now let's look
at the same thing parallel situation in the
red geometry which connects to the Einstein
relativistic addition of velocities and rotations
in the hyperbolic setting so-called Loren boosts
so here is our red geometry and here is our core
Circle in the red geometry x^2 - y^2 = x going
through the origin zero and also this uh Point P
here okay so the exercise now is very analogous
to the previous one this is the point that these
two things are basically the same algebraically
almost and uh even though the diagrams look very
different once you understand the way one of
them Works understanding the other one is very
simple step okay so suppose that we have three
lines through the origin and uh they meet this
vertical line where the x-axis has coordinate
one at the points 1 comma T 1 comma s and 1 comma
P just as before and that these three lines meet
our core Circle at points a b and d so that a is
1 over 1 - t^2 t over 1 - t^2 B is 1/ 1 - s^ 2 s
over 1 - s^ 2 and D is 1/ 1 - p^ 2 p over 1 - p^ 2
and let's assume in addition that they're related
by this following geometrical condition that the
segment AB the line AB is in fact parallel to the
line PD this is p so exactly the same condition
as we just had in the previous thing so show that
the relationship between the three projective
lines is that this projective Line times this
projective line equals this projective line in
the sense of the algebraic structure in the red
geometry which I remind you here's the formula
for that that A to B * C to D is a C + B D * a
d + b c so almost the same as the ukian situation
except that there's a plus sign there not a minus
sign so that this parallel business on
the core Circle exactly corresponds to
having this multiplicative relation
in this one-dimensional projective
line and then show that equivalently
this just unravels to showing that P
equal t plus s over 1 Plus Ts in other
words our relativistic addition formula
so we see a lot of things connecting here we
see that these Einstein relativistic additional
velocities is really a onedimensional
phenomena at heart okay it's really a
story that's describable just in terms of this
one-dimensional projective situation where we
have this algebraic structure on the uh this
one-dimensional situation coming from this
red geometry and then when we transform that
situation to the plane via this core Circle
then we get this very nice situation that we
can sort of read off what's going on Purely in
terms of these kind of parallel chord kind
of situations that chord parallel to that
chord if you're interested in this kind of
alternate uh red kind of geometry you might
have look at some of the later videos in the
wild and alge Series so from roughly from 33
to 42 where I talk about some Physics oriented
things including relativistic uh physics and
also talking about the kinds of alternate complex
number structures that are going on here okay so
it certainly suggests that there's a red version
of complex numbers where this is the basic formula
instead of having a minus sign like we're all
familiar with with ordinary complex numbers
so it turns out that this red complex number
situation is essentially just as interesting
as the usual complex number story okay um
we start to see that our focus on the ukian
situation which is largely driven first of all by
the historical dominance of uid but also strongly
supported by our Reliance our over Reliance
on real numbers and distances angles circular
functions cosine and S their inverse functions
and so on all these transcendental things that
they box Us in and prevent us from seeing the
obvious parallels between the ukian situation
and this relativistic situation when we let go of
the real number scaffolding and move to a purely
algebraic rational point of view that works over
a eneral field we see that the two stories are
pretty well the same we have the language to be
able to see things in a much bigger way and then
it turns out that as one goes a little bit further
in mathematics and go to higher dimensional things
that uh this relativistic kind of mathematics that
we've touched based with here turns out ultimately
to be in fact more important than the ukian
one okay so it turns out that when you uh move
to sort of Matrix algebra operator algebras uh to
functional analysis to Lee Theory and to a lot of
uh projective geometry that the relativistic
generalizations of what we've been talking
about figure more prominently than the ukian
generalizations so it's very good idea if we're
interested in higher mathematics to really fully
understand and appreciate the parallel between
these two kinds of geometry and the fact that
the red geometry is every bit as interesting and
important as the much more familiar blue one all
right so lots of important ideas and interesting
uh kinds of uh things to think about here in
our next video we're going to return to this
projective triple quad formula also known as the
triple spread form formula in the two-dimensional
situation and show how it connects with circum
Circles of triangles and actually gives us a very
powerful tool to address the issue of curvature
in the plane it's usually a calculus notion but
we'll see that with our algebraic tools at hand
we can get at curvature in a much more elementary
and in fact Pleasant way so I hope you'll join
me for that I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for
listening